Good morning, Minister and officials.
Welcome to the Social Services and Community Select Committee.
Thank you for coming back again this year.
Look, just the normal process. If you could introduce yourself
maybe for those watching, and then give us some
opening comments, and then we'll move to questions from members.
Yep, thank you.
So look, at the table today, I have with me the Chief Executive,
Amanda Miller,
and also in the room I've got Oranga Tamariki leadership team to
assist with answering any operational questions today.
Look, during this term as Children's Minister, it's been a real
privilege to be able to go up and down the country,
and to manage to visit all the Oranga Tamariki
sites across the country. Sometimes, some of them I've
been to multiple times. And in these visits, I've also been able
to, on average, visit around three other community provider partners
on the day as well. These visits have allowed me to
have a real insight into
what the frontline are feeling,
the issues that they are facing each and every day, and just
their commitment to their job. Often they can do everything
right
and not get the result that they would like, and they get up the next day and they
do it all over again. And that takes courage, passion, and conviction
of people that really do care about the outcomes of our young people.
So I just wanted to take a moment to thank them for the amazing efforts
that they've made.
And I'd also like to acknowledge the caregivers, because I've also had the
opportunity to meet caregivers from across the range.
So whether they be Oranga Tamariki caregivers, provider caregivers,
caregivers in the disability space, and also just those
whanau caregivers that get up each and every day as well, those
grandparents, aunties, uncles, that step up when a
young person needs them the most. So it's been an absolute privilege
to be able to do that in my time as the Children's Minister, and I look
forward to continuing doing that.
The size of the Oranga Tamariki
is too big.
We can't understate how massive the job is.
On average, Oranga Tamariki staff now support or interact
with around 18,000 young people every day.
Oranga Tamariki receives 108,000 reports of concern around
the safety of a child per year. That's roughly one every five
minutes, every day. Each of these needs to be investigated for
abuse and neglect. Safety planning needs to be undertaken.
Families in crisis need to be worked with to ensure that they're referred to
the services that can best help them.
On top of this, social workers need to run family group conferences, meet
family court obligations, engage in youth justice work, recruit
and support caregivers, oversee adoptions, manage complex and
high-risk situations involving children in immediate risk
of harm. Oranga Tamariki staff also run and oversee care and protection
residences, youth justice residences, community-based
residential care homes, and community-based youth justice homes,
including for serious youth offenders.
These are highly structured and highly demanding environments, dealing
with some of the most challenging and high-risk young people in the
country, where safety, rehabilitation, and accountability
all must be managed at once in real time.
And for the children who do enter care, the work continues well beyond
placement. It involves securing safe homes, managing
transitions, supporting education engagement, ensuring access to
health and mental health services, connecting young people with drug and alcohol
supports where needed, and building long-term pathways so they're not left
without support after trauma. This is a demanding, complex, and
often emotionally draining work.
It requires constant judgment in high-risk situations where the
consequences of getting it wrong can be life-changing.
I have absolute respect for all the social workers, residential
staff, youth justice workers, caregivers, and frontline teams who show
up every day.
The budget initiatives this year have been put together from the voices
of the frontline, from what they've told us are their major concerns.
The total 2026 budget package for Oranga Tamariki
brings $212.8 million over five
years, as well as $800,000 of capital funding across
these areas of government priorities.
$93.5 million operating and $800,000
capital expenditure funding over four years for additional staffed care
placements for
the increasing numbers of children with high and complex needs that we are seeing.
It will also enhance the range of care responses and intensive clinical
services to prevent escalation of needs and placement
breakdowns, providing better outcomes for children and
families. $90.5 million over four years to
respond to an increased number of reports of concern, and to
implement efficiency measures that improve delivery
timeliness. $27.7 million over two years to
progress the implementation of the recommendations made in the Karen
Potasi Review. Funding will enable Oranga Tamariki to respond
to increased demand for services, including increased reports of concern
and family court applications. And $1.4 million
over five years to address the implementation costs for Oranga
Tamariki arising from the resolution agreement for the Stanford
versus Attorney General case.
This funding will meet costs arising from the transfer of land and assets under
the resolution agreement and the leaseback to Oranga Tamariki.
Overall,
I have reviewed my ministerial priorities in
2026 and reconfirmed the priority performance
indicators that Oranga Tamariki will publicly report against.
These include the percentage of children in care who have been visited by their
social worker at least once in the last eight weeks to ensure their
ongoing safety and well-being. The percentage of critical, within
24 hours, or very urgent, within 48 hours, reports of
concern, to be addressed within these time
frames. Survey results of the Oranga Tamariki caregivers
report, and proportion of complaints audited that were handled in
a way that fully met Oranga Tamariki standards.
The Oranga Tamariki has published the progress against these ministerial
priorities in the performance reports for quarter one, two, and three in the
financial year of '25, '26. And the published
results show that all but one are on track, that being around
the reports of concern, which is why we have put some more
funding into that space. We have seen an unprecedented
increase in reports of concern during this term, and this budget has seen
a number of significant investments to improve this outcome.
The Oranga Tamariki also reports on the government target for youth offending
to achieve a 15% reduction in the total number of children and young people with
serious and persistent offending.
We achieved and surpassed this goal well in advance of the
target, but we will continue with this work and
improve, thanks to greater collaboration across the government
agencies, and thanks to undertaking the new and meaningful pilots and
programs across the country to address these issues long term.
For every child who comes to the attention of Oranga Tamariki and
needs help, I expect that Oranga Tamariki can
help to make their lives better. I believe that we can, and I
believe that we are.
I am heartened by the real and positive changes we are seeing across the
agency and would now welcome any questions the members have.
Thank you very much, Minister. The first question is Helen Julian.
Tena koe, Minister, and welcome to the new Chief Executive, Amanda.
I want to first ask some questions about youth justice,
and it was really concerning to read the Independent Children's
Monitor report that reported that 50% of rangatahi
Maori involved in youth justice had more than 10 reports of concern
made about them when they were younger.
They note the pathway to prison from care to prison, and it would appear
that Oranga Tamariki isn't doing enough to intervene early.
What is in this year's budget to address this?
Look, you raise a really good point.
And it is distressing to see that some of them have had up to
10 reports,
but that also tells you why this is a problem.
It's a generational problem. It's been going on for a very long time, long
before many of us have even stepped into this place.
And so we have to address both. And the budgets
across the last budget and this budget, the focus is
really in that prevention space as well, making sure that when a young person
with high and complex needs comes through our doors, which is often
one of the trigger points to being in the
system longer, having worse outcomes
because those high and complex needs haven't been either
addressed
or the right care hasn't been put in place, and they do
end up within the justice system. So that's why this investment
into the high and complex needs, making sure that we're assessing their needs,
because how can we say we're meeting their needs if we don't even know what their
needs are? So that's what that investment is for, to
stop those repeat reports of concern.
We've also started up some pilots,
where the local iwi and community
are taking that challenge on. Where the reports of concern go directly to
community, and they realize, and we realize, that the
phone was picked up for a reason. And so we make sure that those
supports and services are wrapped around them with that first report of
concern. And we're finding that we're getting less repeat reports of
concern because that support has been put in earlier.
So those are some of the things that we've been doing.
Do you believe that the Military Style Academy funding,
the millions of dollars that is put into that, is the best use of
taxpayer money and the best way to address these issues raised?
What I do believe is we can't afford not to invest that money.
These young people, for a long time, as you've just stated in your previous
question, have ended up in the youth justice system, and it's been
treated like a holding pen for corrections.
I'm not going to tolerate that. And the Military Style Academy is a
holistic approach to helping rehabilitate these young people so
that they don't end up in corrections.
So my answer to you is yes, I do believe it is a good value
for
the taxpayer, because we will have less young people ending
up in our corrections system, and we'll have more young people that will actually
have a brighter future in life.
How many young people are currently in the
latest Military Style Academy?
I've made it very clear, and I'll make it very clear with that first question,
that we won't be answering questions around young people in the Military Style
Academy. You would've seen that in the written parliamentary questions that you've
had back, that their privacy and their families' privacy and
wellbeing is more important than being used as a political football.
Are there still 10 in the Military Style Academy?
I won't be answering-
Sorry, she can't answer that question.
Will I get-
I won't be answering that question
... next question will have to come-
Supplementary?
We're vetting the pilot
No, no. We move on to covering.
Moria Minister,
I know that I've asked you
some of these questions in question time in the House and through
written questions. So I'd really like to just needle in a little bit
more.
I've got some further questions and some supplementaries as well, Mr.
Chair,
to clarify exactly who is caring for kids in
Oranga Tamariki Care, kids
with highly complex needs, disabilities,
in our system.
Can you confirm that kids in Oranga Tamariki care
system are being cared for by adequately trained staff?
So I can't confirm across the board for every single child
within the care or who have come to the attention of Oranga Tamariki
care. But what I can say is that was a huge concern for me
when I first came into this role, which is why I've put such a large
investment into making sure that we are building up the
capacity and capability of Oranga Tamariki.
But also our community partners and providers and potential
community partners and providers, giving them the skillsets that they need
so that they can provide that critical care for our young
people. I'm not going to sit here and say it's perfect.
But what I will say is there has been a massive effort across the
country, to make sure that the training
and the suitability of our caregivers is the best that it can
be.
Supplementary, thank you. Have you been made aware of any
instances of security guards who may be trained as
security guards, but not
with the skills for
the level of care needed for children,
and especially children in Oranga Tamariki care.
Have you been made aware of any instances-
Sorry, you can't make assumptions in a question.
The question is, has she been made aware.
No, you're saying that security guards didn't necessarily have the training.
You're making assumptions. Just clarify.
There's no assumption-
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I will clarify.
So have you been made aware of any instances where security guards
have been caring for children in Oranga Tamariki care?
No, I've not been made aware of security guards being caregivers to
children in Oranga Tamariki care.
Thank you.
I've not been made aware.
Minister, have you,
after question time and after-
But can I just-
Of course
... Sorry to interrupt. But can I just say, if you have been made
aware of a situation like that,
I'd be very grateful if you sent an email through to my office
so that we can follow that up. Because,
if
I understand correctly, you're saying that security guards
have been put in charge of the care of young people
with no other supports in place, just a security guard.
And I want to make sure that I can follow that up.
So if you can-
Thank you
... please send through to my office any specifics.
And that's a concern that I really have about this process here.
This process here might be a place where you can come and ask questions.
But if you're aware of something like that, I would have expected that it would've
been brought to my attention before coming here, so that I can
deal with the safety of a young person, because that's my role,
that's my job, that's my passion. That's why I get up each and every day, to make
sure that young people are safe. And when I hear stuff where they might not be,
it's actually quite upsetting for me sitting here and listening to the fact
that maybe a member has known that young people aren't safe, and it hasn't been
brought to my attention. So I'd just like to just
clarify, please bring these to my attention.
Thank you so much, Minister. I can see that we're both really
concerned about the safety of children in Aotearoa,
and
that I have brought this up in
question time and also followed up with written questions
and also reached out to your office just to be clear.
So what I would like to ask-
Let's just be clear. The ones that have been followed up through written
questions and questions in the House would've been followed up, and you would've
had answers to them. So I'm talking about if you've
got any scenarios where you know kids are
currently in that situation, please
just let my office know.
Thank you, Minister. So- Going to that point,
did you, after
the questions in the House, the written parliamentary questions, and the
independent children's monitor report, have any verbal
or written
advice sought from your office into
this?
I get a whole lot of advice in my role.
If you want specific answers to that advice, you can put that in writing,
and I can get that back to you. But I'm not going to be able to sit here and quote
specific advice across my role as minister and across
all the questions that have been asked of me as a minister.
I really appreciate that you're- I'll just move on to the last one.
I've just got one more question. Thank you.
Just confirming that,
because it was brought to your attention multiple times, and I understand the
massive workload that you have,
am I to understand that you haven't sought further advice
on these?
That's not massive.
Okay. No,
no, no. And can you absolutely- No, that's fine ...
confirm that there are no
staff who
do not have the required training looking after kids in Oranga Tamariki?
My expectation would be that every young person that is in the care of
Oranga Tamariki either has a qualified person who is
taking care of them with the skill set they need, or they are in
placements in homes.
And are you aware of any instances where they aren't? Moving on.
Next question, Lauren. Are you aware of any instances where they aren't? Excuse me.
Sorry.
Thank you. There's $20 million in this budget for
young people with complex needs. Can you please explain what kind
of complex needs they might be and what kind of
programs you envision this budget to be spent on?
So, there's a whole lot of operational work that needs to
go on to make sure that we are meeting the needs of
these high and complex needs that are coming through our door.
I think I'll hand over to Nicolette, who may be able
to talk through the work program of what that looks like and
how that money is going to make a difference in those young people's lives.
So, the specific funding in
this budget is actually about increasing the capacity of our
complex placements for exactly the reason that we
want young people in care with caregivers who can
meet those needs. So, we know our young people have much higher rates of
disability, higher rates of mental health needs.
This is about upskilling. We want all caregivers to be
skilled. We want a particular group of caregivers who have a higher
degree of support and skill around meeting particular needs.
It also funds an increase in our psychologists and
therapeutic resources within Oranga Tamariki, so more
practical support can be provided to the caregivers.
It builds off funding in the previous budget in terms of the integrated safe
care work we're doing, which is in response to
Whanaketia, the royal commission, which is about upskilling
our caregivers across the board,
making our care process easier and simpler for caregivers,
and providing increased visibility and assurance
around safety and a range of things in that space.
Thank you.
New question, Lauren.
Oh, thank you. Thank you, Ms.
Just looking at the categories in the budget, which
is investing in children and young people, there are four
sort of major categories. The first one is the statutory
intervention and transition. Now, I understand most of that work
is done by NGOs, community organizations, et cetera.
But there's very little visibility about how that is
broken down, and therefore very difficult
to assess the performance. So, just wondering if you could comment on
whether there is an opportunity for OT to
break down those categories a little bit more in
budget, and then perhaps mention about how
you measure the performance of those NGOs that
are delivering for you.
So,
just so I've got it right, I don't want to be talking about the wrong thing.
You're talking about disabilities transitioning out of care?
No, no. So, in the budget, investing in children and young people.
Yeah.
So, the bulk of that fund, which is over a billion
dollars, is the statutory intervention.
Yes. Gotcha.
And so, but it's
over 1.1 billion.
Mm.
But it's just one line item.
Yeah.
And so, there's no breakdown of the subcategories.
That makes
the visibility in the allocation, the budget
allocation, difficult to assess.
Yeah. So, I can speak a little bit to that, and then I might give Jesse,
come speak to the changes that are being
made in our contracting and commissioning space
to make sure we're doing exactly what I've just spoken to.
Okay.
And that we're getting really good outcomes for the money that's being spent
on our young people out in the communities, whether it be NGO or our community
partners.
Because we were finding that the contracts that were
existing when I first came in here, and most of them still are
until we transition them over, are based on output,
not outcomes. And so often we didn't actually know if
these young people were getting good services,
or if it's just moderate services, or if they were even receiving the
service at all.
But there is a reporting standard for each contract.
We have hundreds of contracts,
so putting it line by line might be a bit difficult.
But there may be another way that we could report it to get a better
oversight of that. But I'll hand over to Jesse.
Kia ora
Yeah. So approximately 500 million per annum is invested in
contracted services.
Okay.
So through the NGO sector.
And we're happy to follow up in writing about the specific breakdowns as
how that's currently allocated. But roughly speaking, it's
approximately 60% into statutory services-
Right
... and then about 40% into early intervention preventative services.
As the minister said, the performance measures
against all these various different service types do vary.
But we could provide you some insight in writing into primary
performance measures across those contracts.
And a lot of them will pertain to
children having a safe place to stay.
Sure. Yeah.
Or the specific care and protection demands that they require.
My supp was actually going to be about the outcomes-
Yes
... versus outputs.
Yeah.
And I understand the complexity of doing that across
multiple contracts. But, in terms of
our role-
Mm
... it's very difficult to-
Yeah
... to assess how that is performing.
So,
Minister, are you saying that there will be-
Yeah
... some accountability and transparency over
performance in the future?
Yeah. So, as I said, contracts were
generally based on
activities or output,
rather than outcomes.
Okay.
So with the new framework for commissioning a- and
procurement,
contracts will be changing over to outcomes-based
contracts,
where the discussion can be had between each individual provider
or service around what good outcomes are.
A- and I've learnt, even from talking to community up and down the country,
that this is a concern for them, too.
The way that the contracting environment has been in the past, and
probably for
a long time, is very, very competitive.
And it's based on how many people you get through your door, not based on
actually how are they when they walk out your door.
So it's just making sure that we're getting that balance right, so that
the contracting system isn't based on competitiveness,
it's based on the needs of the kids.
Because far too long,
children and whānau have had to meet the system's demands,
rather than the system meeting the children's and whānau's needs.
So it's flipping that switch, and making sure that we're doing it the right way.
Okay.
A few supps on this, and I might s- kick off with a couple of them.
So I might just read this out. Just Oranga Tamariki said that it
relies extensively on iwi and Māori organizations, non-government organizations,
and social service providers' delivery of a range of services to children and young
people and their families. So it's iwi and Māori organizations, non-government
organizations, and social service providers.
Could you just give a bit of a sense of the scale of that,
the types of organizations and the geographic spread?
Yep.
I would actually love to
introduce Darren,
who has been working really hard over the last two and a
half years around our Enabling Communities program,
which is a real focus on what I've campaigned on and
spoken to around devolution back to community, which I
think is going to be a pathway to better
outcomes for all our whānau and family.
And I think this is a perfect opportunity for Darren to speak to the work that
has been going on, but also the work that's going to continue
to grow over the next budget period.
Sure.
Thank you, Minister. Kia ora koutou.
Just quickly, we are trialing at the moment nine
prototypes. We call them prototypes because we're testing
different kinds of partnerships and outcomes with different
communities. It could be an iwi, it could be a collective of providers,
it could be... So there are nine different types.
We've been working with them quite slowly to some degree because
we're looking at a long-term transformation.
So we want to understand what we need to do as an organization
to be able to support the change. We want to be able to evaluate
what the outcomes are and where the changes are.
So it sits alongside what Jessie talked about, the way that we
contract in services as well. So we've got them with iwi
running across the country. Some of the prototypes are
looking at taking some of our statutory roles and functions,
some that we've never done before, ever, as a ministry.
So that's taken a lot of legal work, a lot of accountability, a lot of
monitoring, and a lot of support for the partner as well.
So we're very mindful that we don't want to transfer some of the
responsibilities without them having the capability.
So we've invested a lot of money in capability over the years to be able
to do that. What we have seen as well, even in commissioning,
so Jessie spoke a little bit around what we're commissioning.
We're also testing models for commissioning, that
iwi might commission services in their own community.
So while the point of commissioning might sound like the interesting point, the
reality is that we're testing what it looks like when iwi or
Māori take leadership and commission what they think that they
need. I think you referred, of course, to the ICM report.
We would start to see that there's disparity for tamariki Māori.
We know that. But where we do good for all children, Māori
outcomes improve as well. But we recognize that there
are some disparities that we need to work for, and that is why we're
working with the nine prototypes across the country.
They identify for us some of the things that we would not have known.
So where we're looking at is how to transform our system.
Is it in the way that we contract services?
Is it in the way that we monitor? What can communities do, and
iwi leadership do, that we can't do? So sorry for the long spiel.
I'll give you a bit about it.
Could you give us an example of, you said new models that have never been tested
before. Can you give us a bit of a flavor of what that looks like?
Yes. I think the ICM report referred to two of them, for example.
So I'll talk about one of them that's already come out public, which is with Ngati
Awa and the Eastern Bay of Plenty Alliance.
They're taking over sections, well, they've applied for us to give
delegation of sections 15 and 17, where they will
end up becoming the core point. So they will be making decisions
on Amanda's behalf as the chief executive.
So it's quite critical. The neat part around that, what
we've also supported and invested in, is that they have created their
own hub of services, where the majority
of government-funded services are coordinated by this iwi
alliance. So families that come through our front door are getting
access to services that they might not otherwise have.
So it's a coordinated service response that Ngati Awa is
providing. So we didn't do that. We've hooked into them and enabled that.
And what we're starting to see as well is that other government agents are seeing
the benefit of that platform from which to grow from.
And that's what we've always believed as well, that meeting the needs of
children is not the responsibility of Oranga Tamariki alone.
There's education, there's health, all of those different providers.
So Oranga Tamariki though is working with partners to partner
lead, which is a big thing for us because we've never done that before, where they
lead it. And so it's taking us a bit longer to understand
how they want to do that and develop. So as a part of that example for you.
Thank you. My last supplementary on this is just
around sort of the earlier point around all the outcome-based contracts.
We actually had an interesting
meeting yesterday as a committee with the Social Investment Agency.
And just a point they made was that it was what you measure that actually feeds
through to what, whether it's outcomes or outputs.
And often if you're just measuring, let's say, a truck roll, you're ultimately
going to be an outputs measurement.
So I'm interested in what measurement,
metrics are you putting in place
to inform these outcomes-based contracts?
There are multiple metrics, so it's also up to the partner that we're working
with as well. But one fundamental one that sits true for all
of them at the moment is that the experience of the children and the
family that comes through the support system.
So it's not just about ticking off the numbers of certain points.
They want to know that experience because they believe that the
experience will sharpen their ability to seek help earlier,
to be able to access support that they otherwise would not, and that they will be
able to get support. So that's one of the measures, is the
satisfaction of whanau and children that are
accessing the services. The other technical ones that we look at as a
ministry is re-notification rates.
So for example, we know that there's a percentage of
families that come through our system, like we heard about the 10
consecutive reports that have come through in the Youth Justice report.
But actually, they keep
coming back into the system. So what we're noticing as
well with some of the pilots or the prototypes that we're testing is that
there's a reduction in the volume of
re-notifications. Which means to say, and I think the ICM report
also kind of identified that there's disparity,
but the further you go into the system, the more persistent that
disparity is. And so for us as well is that what we're
seeing through the Enabling Communities prototypes is a
disruption of some of those patterns.
We haven't yet been able to analyze it, so at the end of this year we will be
evaluating the Enabling Communities prototypes and the
work that's happening across the country on those measures.
Sorry, I did say that was my last one, but I will have to ask one more.
Just in terms of the experience, how do you measure that?
Because that's a qualitative measure,
and if you're talking about a child, they don't really have a comparator often to
compare to. So how do you get a good measurement that you can
actually inform decision-making and-
You're right
... inform whether the performance-based contracting methodology is working?
It is qualitative. It is a qualitative measure.
But we measure that every year as well through our annual
Te Matataki report, which is a survey we undertake with
children that are in our care. So every year they feed into
us. And so every year they tell us that actually their
voices being heard, being recognized,
and being actioned are what they would qualify as us as a
system responding to the needs of young people and children.
So when I talk about how do we qualify experiences of young
people and children, it's that, have they been heard?
Have we noted it? And have we responded to what they have
told us through those reports?
It's always about outcomes though, the outputs.
I'm coming to Donna. Supplementary.
Yeah, I could go on asking questions about this-
Yeah, if you want to, you go for it
... all day. But in terms of the contracts,
I note that in the questions that you supplied back to the
committee,
that in 2025 and 2026, there were 72
contracts awarded over a million dollars.
But it says that the 2026/27 figure is not
available yet because
Oranga Tamariki has not yet finalized what, if any, contracts are
expected to be awarded for the value of $1 million in the
26/27 financial year, which is imminent.
So
I'm just aware that last year there was some delay for some of the organizations in
delivery. They were concerned that this was-
... so they thought their funding was all being cut.
There was a whole lot of drama, and then there was a realization
that contracts had just been delayed, and there was some problem with that.
So
in the face of the challenging times we have for children in our communities, and
if we put them at the center of this, my question is, why are-
Do we not know this? And is there a risk that we end up in the same
situation we ended up in last time?
Well, kia ora. I'm happy to answer that, and I'll hand to Jesse with some of the
detail. So the short answer is that we are
in a very different time than we were a couple of years ago.
So our relationships with providers are
in a far greater place. The engagement that Jesse and his team
have done over the past 18 months has really rebuilt those relationships
and rebuilt that trust.
We are in the process right now of
extending a large number of contracts.
So there are no providers in the situation of not knowing their
situation for the next financial year.
And Jesse, you might be able to talk to some of the numbers there.
Yeah, very good. So yeah,
as the chief executive's mentioned, we are extending large numbers of contracts.
In that process, we are looking for opportunities to
relieve some administrative pressure on providers.
So where possible, we are consolidating contracts.
What that means is, for at least the next two weeks, there may be a couple more
where actually it went from one or maybe up
to three arrangements, and it's now been consolidated down into one.
Right.
Which would obviously change the value and duration of the contract.
We do expect to have that all done by 30 June,
and we've been keeping providers abreast of our progress.
So I think we're on track. But yeah, we will be able to report that following the
end of the financial year once we have it fulfilled.
And in saying that, I think, for a long time,
that the contracts
weren't really being seen to in a timely manner.
Often they would have time-limited funding.
Mm.
And because the process hadn't started early enough,
often contracts were just rolled over because they were time-limited funding just
rolled over,
not really assessed to see what the future should look like or
whether it should continue. This process-
Yeah
... has, over the last two years, has been around cleaning up that
process, having a new framework for how we contract and procure
contracts. But that also means involving community
in that conversation along the way, to make sure that we get that right,
to make sure that their voices are heard,
so that this new framework fits not only
Oranga Tamariki but fits the community.
So Anisa and the team have been doing a
roadshow through all the communities,
and there's been really good provider engagement in that
process. The feedback is taken on board, and that
has helped to design the framework of the new contracting and procurement
process. The reason why we can't kind of
renew those contracts with certainty without
extending is because that new process needs to kick
in, which gives that longer conversation about what contracts look
like, what their expectations of us are, and what our
expectations of them are, so that we get good contracts
that will get good outcomes.
Supreme Court.
That's good.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Minister, very interested in the
feedback around the contracts.
But noting the legal
comment that was made,
how then, or where does the buck stop in terms of
any sort of legal liability?
If that's devolved to NGOs, does the buck stop
there, or does it still sit with the chief executive?
So the answer is it still sits with the chief executive.
Okay.
We can't delegate away our statutory
obligations to young people. But what I would
say to that is, sitting down with the leadership
of these partners, they take that
responsibility very seriously.
They have those conversations with myself that they understand that
whilst the obligation sits with the chief executive,
that they take full ownership
of those decisions and any accountability that needs to happen.
That's why we have to be very careful, work very
diligently to make sure that they do understand whilst
that obligation sits with the chief executive, there'll still be
accountabilities on the leadership of whoever owns that
contract too.
It won't just be, "Oh, you've made a mistake," and there's no
ownership there, and it all goes to the leadership team here.
There will be processes that we also follow to hold
accountability to those leaders.
Major Carter.
Thank you.
So we've heard the minister and the officials talk
proudly about success partnering with Iwi Māori and
Hapu,
and about the influence of
devolving to Iwi Hapu
community through enabling communities.
Why, if you are focused on contracts with Iwi Māori,
noting that Māori Tamariki make up three-quarters
of
Tamariki in care, have you
removed one of the
targets that Oranga Tamariki wasn't meeting,
the measurement base, removing the assessment measurement for service
contracting with Iwi Māori organizations
in this budget?
The measurement
was at 23% of the target.
So
can you tell me why that
assessment has been removed?
Yeah, so when they were looking at-
Those assessments and what we report to.
That was a process that went through quite a few people
to come back with feedback to myself.
And the decision was an operational decision as well
as to where we could be concentrating on the most
important issues for our young people.
I'll hand over to Amanda around the
process and the decision and why.
Thank you, Minister. I think first up, it's important to say that we are
still measuring a number of these things internally through our operational
measures. So it isn't a matter of them no longer being
measured at all. This particular measure is quite a
blunt one, and we're interested in doing some further
work on it. So it's not the end of the matter.
It's really a bit of a reassessment of how we could make that a more appropriate
measure in the future. I think it's
really important to note, and you heard it from the minister and from Darren
earlier, how important these relationships and contract arrangements
are to Oranga Tamariki's ultimate goal, which is
to be far less involved in the lives of children and young
people. So,
this really shouldn't be seen as any attempt to resile from that.
Hold. There's another one. We'll move Marama then. New question.
Like you got three.
Mm-hmm.
It'd be great if I could have three as well.
She can have six.
For this-
In a row.
Your new question, Marama.
Don't get a sustained line.
Three in a row.
It's actually a sup one. This one, if I may.
You want a sup or a prompt?
Yeah, sup.
Okay. Sup.
In fact, there's a few sups on the number-
All right
... of questions everybody can hear, if I may.
And so, Minister Moriena, kia ora tatou.
Kia ora.
The Iwi Māori organization piece,
and the efforts to
reinstate trust, good thing.
Keep doing that. But what I do think is interesting, partly,
is that 40 years ago, if you want to measure, 40 years ago, Whānau
Taiao was launched. And 40 years ago, we're still having to ask the same questions.
So to my question,
so page 153 of the budget also states the current measure.
So talking about the measuring piece of it, the targets are
narrow, so the narrowing targets thing.
So what is that?
How come?
What makes it narrow, and how would
you
improve that? If the target is narrow, what do you think you're
looking for? What are you looking for?
And
yeah, let's ask that one first.
So I guess what we don't want to do is
create some perverse consequences.
What we want are long and enduring outcomes based contracts
and relationships with Iwi Māori, and we're absolutely committed to that.
It's a huge priority for me personally, and I've made these expectations
clear
to the organization. We're so far down the road here
as it stands that
we are beyond this particular measure anyway.
I think what we want to do is create a measure that's a bit more meaningful, so
that encapsulates all of those aspects of the contracts rather
than just the numbers.
Yeah. So
the narrow bit is about the numbers, and you want to know more than that.
Is that what that's-
I want to know more than that. Yes.
Yeah. So what is the more? What makes up the more more?
So I guess
it's-- Sorry to interrupt.
Mm.
It's the quality of those relationships, the outcomes of those
contracts that we've already talked about today.
It is the successful move closer
to communities,
iwi, hapū and whānau of decision-making.
Those are the things that will really shift the dial
for Tamariki Māori.
Yeah. Just as a matter of reference,
Amanda, this has been trialed before.
Integrated outcomes is not a brand
new concept. And I know this and Darren
knows I know this because we've done this stuff together or attempted to over the
years. It might have a slight tweak in a description, but essentially
integrated outcomes, outcomes result-based accountability
performances, blah, blah, blah. All of this language has been trialed before.
What has not been trialed
or what hasn't been
tested is the
resourcing that goes behind that.
Mm-hmm. Yes.
And then actually, really, truly, and
enduringly
enables community groups, whether they're Māori,
Pākehā-
Yeah
... whatever those groups are made up of, that they are given the
genuine and absolute
trust, resource, and statutory
support to do that job. So we can, like Sue and your team
can get out of the way, but engage when you need to.
Yeah. I'd just like to hand over to Darren because
a lot of that stuff you're speaking to is what we've been
working on.
And I think he's the best one to speak to, to give it the credit
that it deserves.
Thank you.
Yeah.
And I think all the points that you raised, I will have to say, yes,
we know and acknowledge that. So tena koe.
The biggest part that we've been looking at is, as I was trying to raise before,
how do we build the capability of Māori and iwi and
communities to be able to take on those roles?
So to your point, in the past, we have oftentimes done integrated
contracting without thinking about how to build the capability
for long-term, sustainable change.
Yeah.
And that has been the biggest change this time over here, is evaluating this
along the way. And already we recognize that some of our
systems that we have put in place might work for us-
Mm-hmm
... or sometimes doesn't work for us either-
Yeah
... but it's not going to work in a transformative way moving forward.
So even how we see that and shift those decision-making.
So part of the big goal for us as well is did we shift not
just resources and money? So Jessie talked about how
we contract a half a billion dollars a year into contracted
services, but how do we shift decision-making?
So what is the decision-making that happens alongside that?
Do our whānau, hapū, iwi communities have the right to be able
to make those decisions? And so it goes hand in hand with the
delegations of authority-
Yeah
... which is a lot of work. And some of our people don't want to take that part.
Mm.
And so we have to work through along that one to say which part.
The other part I just wanted to mention, too, is as you talk about,
Poatuata Two.
Mm.
And fundamentally, one of the critical pieces inside Poatuata
Two was the belief that the state had a misunderstanding
around whānau.
Mm.
And that while whānau may be harmful in some circumstances, this also
can be the solution of how to work through that.
So what we've been working on at the moment is how do we identify that
leadership, and how do we work better with whānau to create safety and
protection for mokopuna and tamariki?
What we recognize, and it's taken us as a ministry a long time to
recognize, we alone cannot keep children safe.
Yeah.
And that the closer the eyes are to the child and the proximity of the child,
the better, the safer children will be.
Mm.
And that we want to disrupt the patterns over that.
We don't want to wait for 10 reports of concern.
Mm. Yep.
So at which point, and what I think I see him kind of identified,
and I'm sure that you would agree as well, is that oftentimes we don't have the
right response for the situation.
Yeah.
And that sometimes in standardizing the responses we do as a
ministry, they're not the right response for that particular
family at that time.
Yeah. Understood.
So the working at the moment with our iwi and
communities is identifying some of that.
The insights will hopefully inform our practice, inform
what we do as a ministry-
Mm
... and be able to do that. So that's why the evaluations at the end of this year
will be important to kind of tell us.
But I agree with you around the integrated, just using language will not pick
it up.
Mm-hmm.
The sentiment behind it-
Mm
... must be devolving some of those decisions and that
authority now.
Thank you. Mm. Which is why I've set a clear
kind of expectation around what I said previously,
that for far too long, families and
children have had to work around the system. Yep.
And they've had to meet the system's needs,
rather than the system meeting their needs.
And I've been very, very clear, the whole time that I've been in this
space, that that needs to reverse, that the system
needs to meet the needs of the kids.
But I would reiterate again that the system isn't
just Oranga Tamariki. The system is education,
housing,
mental health,
and it needs to meet the whole of the child, not just bits and pieces.
Mm. Otherwise, you've just got a puzzle piece here, a puzzle piece there,
and their needs slip through the cracks.
Which is why we've been working alongside
all other agencies, using the Social Investment Agency
as one touch point, but not just stopping there.
So we have a joint work program that we're getting
underway with mental health between Oranga
Tamariki, and critical care and mental health, that
is just starting to get underway. We have a joint work
program with the Ministry of Education- Yeah ...
about the importance of making sure that our young people who may have been
excluded from school or have had barriers put in place
of getting an education, that the focus and the priority is getting
them back in front of a classroom. And that may not necessarily be a
one-size-fits-all approach to how education needs to be. Mm.
Which is another critical point- Mm ...
working with community, because they may be able to offer an
alternative solution that meets the needs of that young person.
We have a work program with transitional
housing for when we have young people who have disabilities
who are transitioning out of care.
Often that transition planning and process was left to the
last minute, which left that young person with uncertainty
and anxiety about what the future looks like.
But now the planning starts a whole lot earlier, so that by the
time they are 18 and they're starting to age out, whilst we still have
support networks a- and provide networks to young people till they're around
21,
that transition needs to be clearer, smoother, to provide
clarity, to allow that young person to have the best chance
of transitioning into community and having a really
positive future in life. So there's a lot of work going on, not just
within Oranga Tamariki-
Mm ... but within the children's system as a whole- ...
which I think is going to be to the betterment of our young people.
I don't think we've been as far ahead in that kind of
collaboration of unbundling the silos as we are
right now. But there's still-
We did try with children's team too, the-
Yeah
... the minister you might recall.
Yeah. And also-
As we expanded
... you make a good point.
Mm.
We trial a whole lot of things.
But do we actually, after that assessment-
Mm
... actually say, "Hey, this worked,"
and actually continue it as business as usual, or do
those pilots or those trials get lost in all the noise?
And so that's something that we're really focused on as well.
If something is working,
we need to be supporting that to become what good looks like-
Yeah
... across the whole of the sector.
Minister can I just come to- But also we need to make sure that- Sorry ...
if things aren't working- Yeah ...
that we're not encouraging contracts or processes that encourage
people to try and continue making something that doesn't work, work So they can
have the courage to come forward and say, "Can we pivot, try something new?"
So the military style academies, if I can bring it to that, ironically-
Yep
... following that statement. So the funding
profile, Minister, it's 9.218 million.
The figures sound all very, like they can nearly gloss over the reality.
I'm not saying dollars don't matter. Obviously, they do matter.
But
it's a consistent annual figure.
Mm.
And
what that tells me and concerns me is, is that what
you're building? Is that build it and they will come?
Mm.
Because if that's the consistent annual, yes,
we'll just reduce prevention to this figure, and we'll put
intervention there, and that blue line stretched right out
here, and the little blue line for prevention stopped here-
Mm
... is that your policy military
response to mokopuna?
A military ... You called it holistic, which I thought was the
complete opposite. Military, the word in itself suggests a whole lot of other
terrible and not good things, whatever word follows it.
So is that your policy response, your policy
program, to youth in Aotearoa and Māori
youth?
Okay. So,
there's a really good question around
money being made available.
We know that there are
two areas of this that we need to look at.
We know that there's prevention,
so that young people don't end up in the youth justice system in the first
place, which is where we are putting a lot of priorities and focuses into
the prevention space. But what we also know is that there are
young people that are currently in that crisis space, where we need to have
that wraparound
support, specialized services put in place,
which is why I called it holistic, because that is the approach that's been
taken,
where we, for the first time ever, have sometimes only just for the
first time,
asked these young people the questions that needed to be asked.
And as I said in the beginning, how do we say we're meeting a young person's
needs if we don't even know what their needs are?
So a lot of the process in that MSA is around
actually asking the right questions,
understanding the needs of those young people that haven't been met in the past,
because they have in the past,
maybe over multiple years,
not had somebody ask those right questions.
And that's how they've slipped through the crack and ended up where they are now.
And so that approach needs to be financed.
We have to have certainty that we can pay the
clinicians, the teachers, the
activities, and things that we're providing these young people in
the future so that we can have certainty that those will be available
for those young people. One of-
So military equals certainty? Mm.
Well, it's certainty that we are going to have the services and
support that are there for young people that need it.
There's no reason why,
if the need at this end drops,
that the funding will drop with that, because that's the process that
I've been having a conversation with around contracts.
They have to be-
How many have dropped?
The money has to be in the right place
for the right needs and the right young people and the
services that they need.
But you can't go and say you're going to run these programs,
you need mentors, you need clinical services, you need
education services, you need all these things along the
way to help these young people and say, "Oh, but sorry, we're not going to put the
funding aside to be able to pay for that."
The contract-
Last supplementary, Ms. Helen.
Thank you.
I was interested in the money that went
into the Patasi report, and particularly when-
Sorry, can you just repeat that last one? My apologies.
I was interested in the funding that was allocated to meeting the
recommendations of Karen Patasi's report.
Thank you.
And when you were talking just now about collective
systems of responsibility, one of her recommendations is a
statutory framework that
defines the government agencies that are involved.
I appreciate that in 2014, we thought we'd done this,
but clearly, we've failed to do this.
We haven't really got a system that is a children's
responsibility system.
I want to know, is that a priority to revisit
that and look at that particular recommendation?
Because the system
that is
present for children is failing so badly.
Look,
whilst I agree that
the system has failed some children,
and we often talked about the system like it's an ultimate failure for all the
children across the country. I just want to make it perfectly clear
that for many children in this country, our workers are out there
working very hard and produce some pretty phenomenal
care for our young people, and they have good outcomes.
But for the ones that have not had those good outcomes, I
absolutely agree. It's been a priority for myself since coming into
this space, to bring government agencies together,
to bring them around the table, outside of those silos of where they're making
individual decision-making, and that it is a children's
system as a whole, rather than it being just
pepper potted around government agencies. It is a priority.
It is something that is currently, decisions are being made in that
space still. And it is something where consultation
still has to happen with community, with government
agencies, and with all those who kind of have a role to play
in what that looks like. So I won't be making any
guarantees of decision-making before that consultation process has happened.
New question, Willow-Jean
Thank you.
Coming back to youth justice, I want to ask the minister some questions
about other youth justice facilities.
And in particular, what is in the budget to improve the situation at Korowai
Manaaki? In April this year, we had another
rooftop incident.
I understand in my last written questions that there were 26
unfilled vacancies, 15 of them youth workers and
one psychologist. That secure care extensions are still
occurring illegally, and that a reset plan was done and
completed last year, but it obviously hasn't fixed the
problems.
Is the minister satisfied with the management of Korowai Manaaki?
Absolutely. Because if that member wants to
say that the previous government had this perfect little
system of youth justice that never did anything wrong,
then I'm sure she'd be the last one to be throwing the stones that she's throwing
right now. But right now, this has had so much
improvement to the point where staff are now telling me that they feel
supported in their roles. They feel like they've been given the tools that they
need to provide what those young person
needs. Occasionally, there will be something that goes wrong, like a
rooftop incident. But what I can say to you, we've gone from around
15 incidences a year to two in the whole time that I've been
minister. So for you to throw that out like
I'm harming and hurting these kids intentionally,
is actually offensive. And I am proud of the work that
the youth justice team has done to improve themselves.
Not only improve the safety of the young people in their care, but
improve the safety of the staff. So we're not setting the staff up to
fail, and we're not setting the young people up for corrections.
So yes, I'm absolutely proud of the work they've done.
Not saying it's perfect, not saying that some things don't go
wrong. But I'm proud of the hard work and effort that
the youth justice team has put in place.
And I'm really proud of the leadership team that has taken on some of the toughest
problems
that OT has to face, and that has been ignored for far too
long. So I will hand over here.
I just wanted to know what your-
No, because you asked the question
No, I asked what your-- My question was, are you satisfied?
We're going to give you the answer.
Wait, she's addressed-
Chair.
She's addressed...
Sorry. Yeah, thank you, Chair. My question was-
No, she's the Chair
... if the minister is satisfied. I don't need to hear from the staff.
Hold on.
But my question was directly to the minister.
I will. I was-- I was going to come to you.
Yeah. Thank you.
You can ask a supplementary. I have another supplementary.
No, you're not. I'm the Chair.
You are the Chair.
Well, my question was to the minister.
She's addressed my question-
Yeah. And I am wanting a full answer
... she asked to hear from the staff.
I-
Because there were some terrible accusations that were made within that question
Don't disrespect the Chair.
Supplementary.
Well, just I'll hear from her first, then the member.
We want to clarify because that question had a whole lot of loaded
assumptions-
Mm-hmm
... that need to be addressed. Now, if you want them addressed, fair enough.
But if you want to just chuck out loaded questions like that and not get an
answer back-
Then you're not paying attention
... then what are we doing here?
Well, let's hear-
I have since she got the-
Let's hear from her first, and then you'll come to you
... through the Chair.
Point of order, Mr. Chair.
Point of order.
Mr. Chair. Point of order.
Mr. Chair, do we have to go into private session for a moment?
Well, up to you.
Oh, there's so many of you here, sorry.
If we could please go into private session.
As long as it doesn't take up our extra time.
It won't take up the time.
Okay, we won't do it.
Can I just-
No.
Can I just note that we have-
I want to hear the answer, please
... over 50-
I want to hear the answer
... again, lots of primary stats, Mr. Chair.
Sorry. Point of order, Mr. Chair.
Point of order, Willow-Jean.
The minister is claiming that I've made a whole lot of wild accusations
here. They are actually responses to written questions.
The unfilled vacancies, the secure care extensions that are
illegal, are all answers that have been provided to my written questions.
So there's nothing incorrect about these.
Yep. And we're wanting to give you an answer. So do you want the answer?
She gave me an answer. I'm telling you.
No, we're wanting to give you a detailed answer.
I'll just rule on the point of order.
Look, acknowledge that, like I've said before, I want to hear from this gentleman,
and then we'll come to your further supplementary.
Well, that was your sup. Okay. Thank you.
Yes, go on, Mark.
Thank you, Chair. I think the minister raises some very
good points in answer to the question, but hopefully with a little bit more detail,
and I'll try and go through your answers.
Quickly, please. Thank you.
Hopefully. Thank you, Chair.
No, Willow-Jean. Excuse me.
I'll take the answer-
Respect, please
... and I'll take the question.
So, when it comes to-
Questions are through the chair, Willow-Jean, as you well know.
Thank you, Chair. When it comes to your question around recruitment, and you
can include in that retention. Obviously, we work in a very
challenging environment. We work with some of our most at-risk
and complex youth.
And we're not immune to the same recruitment and retention
issues that a lot of organizations are seeing right now.
It's a really difficult role that we're asking people to play
in those organizations and in the residences.
In regards to secure care, the settings are in legislation.
Anytime we use secure care, it's for the safety of the rangatahi, for
the safety of other rangatahi that might be around them, and for the safety of our
kaimahi.
Every time secure care is used, the settings are reviewed constantly.
And if those settings change, then the person is released from secure care.
Every time secure care is used, it's reviewed by a senior manager,
and the circumstances and the challenges around that.
When it comes to the extensions, we're actually pretty happy to say that we have
reduced those by a percentile from 5% to 4%
over the last 12 months.
None of those situations are ideal, but we're training our staff
always. And they're responding to the training by reducing the
need. The overall use of secure care has reduced quite
considerably over the last 12 months.
And I don't think that's a reflection of the use of secure care, it's a reflection
of how to manage the incidents that might
lead to the need for secure care, and it's a really good reflection of the
training and the work that the kaimahi has done
When it comes to Korowai Manaaki itself,
it is a challenging residence because of the cohort that they have.
They do take on some very high-risk young people.
The more recent rooftop incident, which was attended by myself
and the minister, and our chief executive,
having had a lot of experience with these types of incidences in other
organizations myself, I would say it's one of the best run ones I've seen.
We worked very closely with the police and fire and emergency.
There was never a circumstance where the young people were going
to be able to abscond. We worked with them, they were safe, and
they came down.
I don't think, given the challenging environment that we work in, that we could
ever give any
assurance that that would never happen again.
Whenever something happens, then we work on the environment, the
infrastructure, the people, the training, and the context around it.
We review it, we look at it, and we learn from that.
And hence, we've had the significant reduction in those type of incidents that we
have had from about six one year to two the next, to zero the
next, and only one in the last 12 months.
I'm very, very proud to be leading the group that has made the
difference that they have made, and particularly in Korowai Manaaki, given the
reset that they did post-Christmas.
Supplementary.
To the minister.
Is the minister aware that some Oranga Tamariki
officials were warned of a possible rooftop event
several weeks before the event happened in April?
No.
You were not aware?
I answered the question.
Okay. Just confirming, you're saying you're not aware that staff
were warned of a possible rooftop incident before the event
occurred in April?
No.
That's
a
really
strange question. I'm not sure.
Well, not really. What is the cost of a rooftop incident?
I'm not sure that
leaving it unrepaired would be the best thing for those young people.
Do you know what the cost was?
So spending the money is important around the safety
of the young children.
I don't know what you're trying to establish here.
So you don't know what the cost is?
I, my question was- Supplementary, Laura. Supplementary, Laura.
Can I suggest, would you say it's good use of tax fund or taxpayers' money to
be paying for KFC to get young people off the roof as an
alternative?
Absolutely not.
Or what about prevention, so they don't get up on the roof in the first place?
No. Okay. New question, Jamie.
Oh, sorry. Final question.
New question, Jamie.
Thank you, Minister.
Yes.
In your opening address, you discussed about
responding to reports of concern.
Yeah.
And just sitting here, I think you said one in every five
minutes of concern.
Yeah.
If you took that across the year.
And obviously that's over a day, when
it's open, those reports will be flooding in.
As a New Zealander, just to hear those numbers are quite shocking.
Mm.
So I'm just wondering, firstly, what
does the ministry understand by those reports of concern?
And obviously, in the last couple years-
Mm
... there's been a lot more concern reports coming in.
Yeah. And so, there's lots of different ways we can look at this, right?
So reports of concern don't necessarily mean
that the young person is at immediate risk of harm.
Sometimes someone will pick up a phone because they have a concern
that maybe this family needs some help.
It could be around their financial circumstances.
It could be around absolutely anything.
But this shows us, with
around 105,000 reports of concern in a
year, show us that more people are actually willing to pick up the phone now,
and have that conversation about caring about their neighbor, caring
about a young child and their life, and actually taking the
time to pick up the phone and have that conversation.
So for me, that side of it is quite positive, because a
hidden problem is really hard to solve.
But a problem that's out in the open and people are willing to have a conversation
about, is easier to try and tackle and
manage.
And we've also got the other stat that kind of surprised me,
around Oranga Tamariki itself, and the staff of Oranga
Tamariki, actually touch point with around
18,000 children a day,
and do something for around 18,000 children a day in some shape or
form.
And so, that just shows the effort that is really going in
to make sure that young people have their needs met.
So we don't just deal with the young people in our care.
We often deal a lot in that prevention space.
And what people don't realize is that the majority of Oranga Tamariki's
work is to prevent young people coming into care.
And I think that point is often lost.
Just supplementary if I may, Mr. Chair.
Mm.
Sure.
In the estimates in the budget-
Mm
... you've allocated considerable funding.
It's over 19 million over the next four years.
Yes.
And 19.8 million in this year's budget.
Yeah.
Mm.
What response and what are you expecting to see from that
investment?
Yeah. There have been a lot of reviews and
reports into responses. Karen Potasi review
is one of them. And one of the points that was made within
that review was, that poor young child had so
many different touch points along the way, and he was like
the hidden child.
Because one agency had a concern raised, another one had
a concern raised, but nobody actually followed through with any
action of those. And it's like pieces of the puzzle, but nobody saw the
whole puzzle. So part of that is the hub.
And part of that is we've
initiated a hub within our national call center, which is
specifically dedicated to the young people
who have a parent that is
incarcerated, and making sure that we have sight of that
young person, making sure that they are safe.
Making sure that whoever is taking care of that young person as well, which is
a new approach,
that we're making sure that they have the supports they need to take care of that
young person until their parent comes out of the
corrections system. So rather than knocking on their door in a
real way of,
are these children safe? If they're not, here we come.
It's more of a knocking on the door and saying, "Have you got
everything that you need,
to take care of this young person? What can we do to help?"
And that hub helps to initiate that, because we have all the
agencies around the table to make those decisions and all the information,
every piece of the puzzle, is in one room.
So that's where some of the investment is going.
The other part is we know that our frontline social
workers have been under the pump for a very long time. It's not new.
It's probably been around since I was a young kid, where social workers
have talked about, now it's caseloads,
and the pressure of beating their statutory obligations.
So a lot of that funding will go into support for our
frontline social workers. And some of that will be in the role of the
allied support workers that we trialed, to work
alongside social workers to do the work that might not necessarily be
at a statutory level, but will take some of that pressure and that
load, so that social workers can concentrate on their statutory
work.
Minister, I might just-
Yeah
... go.
Thank you.
And just a couple, if we can just sort of short, quick questions last as I've got a
few questions coming.
This was my primary at the beginning, and it's a very good start on this.
So, I am concerned that I hear about people
who are being told that there is no further action
required when they're still really concerned.
Yeah.
That's turned up three or four times to me.
There was a report from Oranga Tamariki itself in June
2025, which suggests that one of the
unintended consequences of the
capacity of the system being reached is that we might get that pattern
emerge. What work is being done to make sure
that when you reach the capacity, you don't find
people taking courses of action like that?
Are we keeping an eye on the no further action
amounts as there's been an unprecedented
record of reports of concern? But are we also catching the
other things that that report talks about that might show a false
stabilization in numbers? How are you doing it?
Okay. So,
I too am concerned
about the situation that you're talking about, which is why we're putting such a
massive investment into making sure that
the area around reports of concern,
have more resourcing, have more training, and have more
capacity. And looking at ways where we can build in
efficiencies into that system, so that the very thing that you're
talking about right now,
that doesn't happen. So yes, very concerned about it, but that's the
reason why all these things we've spoken about today around
training, capabilities, capacity,
is so important, and why we've put that major investment
into that report a concern area.
Will we measure that matter of how many are being dropped out of the
system and see whether it increases?
That's a technical, so I'll just hand it over to Nicolette.
So I'll be very brief, but there are a range of things that we're doing both to
improve the way we make decisions at the front door and how we measure them.
So, we've introduced, for example, a digitized report of concern to make it
easier for people to report and to get really clear information and to be able to
use that information more clearly.
We've introduced a range of practice tools, which we've finalized at the end of
last year. We're seeing, because what we do is we look regularly at cases and do
case file review to make sure exactly that we understand
the trend that you're talking about.
So we've got one of those around our front door initial assessment, just about due
for completion at the moment. What it's showing us is that actually there's been a
significant improvement in the tools we used to make better decisions.
When they're used as intended, we see less of that.
But it's absolutely true that demand pressure
does have an impact, and so that's why the combination of things that the
minister's referred to, more allied support workers who can free up social work
time to do that initial assessment work, technology improvements in
our contact center, improvements in the way that we
redesign of a decision response tool, which is how we make those decisions in the
first place. All of that is gearing us up,
both to respond to the increase we have at the moment and looking ahead to what,
not just mandatory reporting might mean, but actually mandatory training.
So we want people to identify and report, and then we want to be able to respond.
Your question, Karanga.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
The number of section 78 uplifts has increased
from 397 in
2021/22 to
682 in '24/25. The
proportion of sections 78 uplifts that are
without notice has increased and now make up three
quarters of the section 78 uplifts
In 24/25, compared to half that in
21/22. Can you confirm that we are once
again seeing a disproportionate uplift of Māori
kids in this country, as stated on
page 116 of the No Further Action
Oranga Tamariki report?
Before I pass over to Nicolette to talk about
the particular area that you're talking about,
I just want to make it very clear
that when I came into Oranga Tamariki,
I made it clear that it wasn't a numbers
game. Because for a while there, there was this
crowing of a 75% drop of children coming into care
like it was a success, but they couldn't tell me if those children were
safe. If a young person needs intervention
and needs to be put into a safe place while we put support
networks in place for whānau to be the best versions of themselves,
whether it be temporary or sometimes unfortunately, it's not
temporary.
I am happy and I am-
So can you confirm-
I stand by that
... that kids are safer in the system, in the Oranga Tamariki system, rather than
with wider whānau?
Which, uh-
Can you confirm that?
Well, when a young person gets removed and put into care,
a high percentage of those young people are with whānau.
I think there's this misconception that when a child gets put in care, that they're
in non-care.
A child in care can be in whānau care, so
just being careful with that, saying would they be better with whānau.
And what are your ministers doing-
The majority of them are with whānau
... to ensure those kids are going to whānau, rather than into the Oranga
Tamariki system, where there's no guarantee they'll be safer?
Everything we do is trying to prevent a young
person going into care. But there are some-
You cut prevention funding across the country.
No, we didn't.
You did.
So we are try— no, we didn't.
We are concentrating on making sure that the
wellbeing of the children come first.
And if that means intervention, and that means that we have to step in
and remove that young person for a time,
I am not going to stand here and say that that's better.
So you're guaranteeing they will be safer in Oranga Tamariki care?
I can't make any guarantees in life because in Oranga
Tamariki care, they could be with whānau, they could be with non-care whānau.
And I am not in everybody's house. What I can say is there is
an expectation to make sure that when we are doing placements,
that we are doing good placements, and we are making sure that those caregivers
have the support they need to look after those young people.
Did you read the Independent Children's Monitor report that said that there is an
increase of children being given back from carers back
into the system because they don't have that support around
them?
Yeah. And I've also read reports, right,
that have said multiple things.
I've also read reports that said the highest risk that a young person is
in, is when they are returned to whānau.
So we have scenarios where-
Are you talking about whānau or wider whānau?
Return home.
Thank you for clarifying that.
And so the problem is,
there is always going to be a scenario where there's potential harm.
So you're happy with the increase from-
But you are expecting me-
Let her finish. Let her finish, please
... 397 uplifts to 682 uplifts?
You're expecting me to guarantee that no child is going to
get hurt or harmed, and I can't guarantee that.
Can you guarantee they'll be safer-
I can-
... once they have been uplifted without notice?
I can guarantee that my expectation is that when Oranga Tamariki
is intervening in a situation where a child
needs to be kept safe, that my expectation is that that young
person is safe.
All right. Well, thank you very much, Minister, and thank you also, chief
officials, for your time this afternoon.
Thank you for the work you do on behalf of some of the most vulnerable children in
the country. Appreciate it.
Bye.
Thank you.